As smartphone-based Human Mobility Systems (HMSes) shift from informing individuals to influencing public asset allocation, it is critical to assess how well they perform. Evaluation techniques of HMSes have typically been ad hoc, limited to single measurements and ignored power-accuracy trade-offs. These trade-offs are important due to built-in and context-sensitive sensing in the phones - e.g., "Find my iPhone" or "Doze mode".

Treating HMSes as physical instruments with inherent physical noise, we propose requirements related to holistic power/accuracy trade-offs, privacy preservation, and ground truth. We then outline a novel evaluation procedure that uses artificial trips and multiple parallel phones to provide controlled, repeated inputs to the HMSes under test. Artificial trips mitigate privacy concerns and allow repeatability while efficiently exploring a wide variety of trip contexts. Parallel sensing with control phones mitigates the effects of context sensitive power consumption and inherent sensing error.

Our results show the benefits of thinking statistically about HMSes. They meet the requirements and account for variations in observed behavior better than the alternatives. They control for outliers, revealing meaningful signals about the behavior of smartphone virtual sensors that are relevant to instrumenting human travel behavior. If adopted widely by the community, the resulting ground truthed, trade-off-aware, public datasets can form the basis for additional HMS optimizations.

In this dataset, we use this procedure to create three artificial timelines with 15 different modes, including ebike and escooter. We use these timelines for a comprehensive evaluation of three different sensing settings with over 500 hours of ground-truthed data.
